README.md, before:

# Planning with Files

> **Work like Manus** — the AI agent company Meta acquired for **$2 billion**.

[![Closed Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-closed/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files?color=success)](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed)
[![Closed PRs](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-pr-closed/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files?color=success)](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aclosed)

<details>
<summary><strong>💬 A Note from the Author</strong></summary>

To everyone who starred, forked, and shared this skill — thank you. This project blew up in less than 24 hours, and the support from the community has been incredible.

If this skill helps you work smarter, that's all I wanted.

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>🌍 See What the Community Built</strong></summary>

| Fork | Author | Features |
|------|--------|----------|
| [devis](https://github.com/st01cs/devis) | [@st01cs](https://github.com/st01cs) | Interview-first workflow, `/devis:intv` and `/devis:impl` commands, guaranteed activation |
| [multi-manus-planning](https://github.com/kmichels/multi-manus-planning) | [@kmichels](https://github.com/kmichels) | Multi-project support, SessionStart git sync |
| [plan-cascade](https://github.com/Taoidle/plan-cascade) | [@Taoidle](https://github.com/Taoidle) | Multi-level task orchestration, parallel execution, multi-agent collaboration |
| [agentfund-skill](https://github.com/RioTheGreat-ai/agentfund-skill) | [@RioTheGreat-ai](https://github.com/RioTheGreat-ai) | Crowdfunding for AI agents with milestone-based escrow on Base |

*Built something? [Open an issue](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/issues) to get listed!*

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🤝 Contributors</strong></summary>

See the full list of everyone who made this project better in [CONTRIBUTORS.md](./CONTRIBUTORS.md).

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>📦 Releases & Session Recovery</strong></summary>

### Current Version: v2.18.2

| Version | Highlights |
|---------|------------|
| **v2.18.2** | Mastra Code hooks fix (hooks.json + docs accuracy) |
| **v2.18.1** | Copilot garbled characters complete fix |
| **v2.18.0** | BoxLite sandbox runtime integration |
| **v2.17.0** | Mastra Code support + all IDE SKILL.md spec fixes |
| **v2.16.1** | Copilot garbled characters fix — PS1 UTF-8 encoding + bash ensure_ascii (thanks @Hexiaopi!) |
| **v2.16.0** | GitHub Copilot hooks support (thanks @lincolnwan!) |
| **v2.15.1** | Session catchup false-positive fix (thanks @gydx6!) |
| **v2.15.0** | `/plan:status` command, OpenCode compatibility fix |
| **v2.14.0** | Pi Agent support, OpenClaw docs update, Codex path fix |
| **v2.11.0** | `/plan` command for easier autocomplete |
| **v2.10.0** | Kiro steering files support |
| **v2.7.0** | Gemini CLI support |
| **v2.2.0** | Session recovery, Windows PowerShell, OS-aware hooks |

[View all releases](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/releases) · [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md)

> 🧪 **Experimental:** Isolated parallel planning (`.planning/{uuid}/` folders) is being tested on [`experimental/isolated-planning`](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/tree/experimental/isolated-planning). Try it and share feedback!

---

### Session Recovery

When your context fills up and you run `/clear`, this skill **automatically recovers** your previous session.

**How it works:**
1. Checks for previous session data in `~/.claude/projects/`
2. Finds when planning files were last updated
3. Extracts conversation that happened after (potentially lost context)
4. Shows a catchup report so you can sync

**Pro tip:** Disable auto-compact to maximize context before clearing:
```json
{ "autoCompact": false }
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🛠️ Supported IDEs (16 Platforms)</strong></summary>

| IDE | Status | Installation Guide | Format |
|-----|--------|-------------------|--------|
| Claude Code | ✅ Full Support | [Installation](docs/installation.md) | Plugin + SKILL.md |
| Gemini CLI | ✅ Full Support | [Gemini Setup](docs/gemini.md) | Agent Skills |
| OpenClaw | ✅ Full Support | [OpenClaw Setup](docs/openclaw.md) | Workspace/Local Skills |
| Kiro | ✅ Full Support | [Kiro Setup](docs/kiro.md) | Steering Files |
| Cursor | ✅ Full Support | [Cursor Setup](docs/cursor.md) | Skills + Hooks |
| Continue | ✅ Full Support | [Continue Setup](docs/continue.md) | Skills + Prompt files |
| Kilocode | ✅ Full Support | [Kilocode Setup](docs/kilocode.md) | Skills |
| OpenCode | ✅ Full Support | [OpenCode Setup](docs/opencode.md) | Personal/Project Skill |
| Codex | ✅ Full Support | [Codex Setup](docs/codex.md) | Personal Skill |
| FactoryAI Droid | ✅ Full Support | [Factory Setup](docs/factory.md) | Workspace/Personal Skill |
| Antigravity | ✅ Full Support | [Antigravity Setup](docs/antigravity.md) | Workspace/Personal Skill |
| CodeBuddy | ✅ Full Support | [CodeBuddy Setup](docs/codebuddy.md) | Workspace/Personal Skill |
| AdaL CLI (Sylph AI) | ✅ Full Support | [AdaL Setup](docs/adal.md) | Personal/Project Skills |
| Pi Agent | ✅ Full Support | [Pi Agent Setup](docs/pi-agent.md) | Agent Skills |
| GitHub Copilot | ✅ Full Support | [Copilot Setup](docs/copilot.md) | Hooks |
| Mastra Code | ✅ Full Support | [Mastra Setup](docs/mastra.md) | Skills + Hooks |

> **Note:** If your IDE uses the legacy Rules system instead of Skills, see the [`legacy-rules-support`](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/tree/legacy-rules-support) branch.

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🧱 Sandbox Runtimes (1 Platform)</strong></summary>

| Runtime | Status | Guide | Notes |
|---------|--------|-------|-------|
| BoxLite | ✅ Documented | [BoxLite Setup](docs/boxlite.md) | Run Claude Code + planning-with-files inside hardware-isolated micro-VMs |

> **Note:** BoxLite is a sandbox runtime, not an IDE. Skills load via [ClaudeBox](https://github.com/boxlite-ai/claudebox) — BoxLite’s official Claude Code integration layer.

</details>

---

A Claude Code plugin that transforms your workflow to use persistent markdown files for planning, progress tracking, and knowledge storage — the exact pattern that made Manus worth billions.

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Claude Code Plugin](https://img.shields.io/badge/Claude%20Code-Plugin-blue)](https://code.claude.com/docs/en/plugins)
[![Claude Code Skill](https://img.shields.io/badge/Claude%20Code-Skill-green)](https://code.claude.com/docs/en/skills)
[![Cursor Skills](https://img.shields.io/badge/Cursor-Skills-purple)](https://docs.cursor.com/context/skills)
[![Kilocode Skills](https://img.shields.io/badge/Kilocode-Skills-orange)](https://kilo.ai/docs/agent-behavior/skills)
[![Gemini CLI](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gemini%20CLI-Skills-4285F4)](https://geminicli.com/docs/cli/skills/)
[![OpenClaw](https://img.shields.io/badge/OpenClaw-Skills-FF6B6B)](https://openclaw.ai)
[![Kiro](https://img.shields.io/badge/Kiro-Steering-00D4AA)](https://kiro.dev/docs/cli/steering/)
[![AdaL CLI](https://img.shields.io/badge/AdaL%20CLI-Skills-9B59B6)](https://docs.sylph.ai/features/plugins-and-skills)
[![Pi Agent](https://img.shields.io/badge/Pi%20Agent-Skills-FF4081)](https://pi.dev)
[![GitHub Copilot](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub%20Copilot-Hooks-000000)](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/reference/hooks-configuration)
[![Mastra Code](https://img.shields.io/badge/Mastra%20Code-Skills-00BCD4)](https://code.mastra.ai)
[![BoxLite](https://img.shields.io/badge/BoxLite-Sandbox-6C3483)](https://boxlite.ai)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-2.18.2-brightgreen)](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/releases)
[![SkillCheck Validated](https://img.shields.io/badge/SkillCheck-Validated-4c1)](https://getskillcheck.com)

## Quick Install

In Claude Code, run:

```
/plugin marketplace add OthmanAdi/planning-with-files
/plugin install planning-with-files@planning-with-files
```

That's it! Now use one of these commands in Claude Code:

| Command | Autocomplete | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| `/planning-with-files:plan` | Type `/plan` | Start planning session (v2.11.0+) |
| `/planning-with-files:status` | Type `/plan:status` | Show planning progress at a glance (v2.15.0+) |
| `/planning-with-files:start` | Type `/planning` | Original start command |

**Alternative:** If you want `/planning-with-files` (without prefix), copy skills to your local folder:

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
cp -r ~/.claude/plugins/cache/planning-with-files/planning-with-files/*/skills/planning-with-files ~/.claude/skills/
```

**Windows (PowerShell):**
```powershell
Copy-Item -Recurse -Path "$env:USERPROFILE\.claude\plugins\cache\planning-with-files\planning-with-files\*\skills\planning-with-files" -Destination "$env:USERPROFILE\.claude\skills\"
```

See [docs/installation.md](docs/installation.md) for all installation methods.

## Why This Skill?

On December 29, 2025, [Meta acquired Manus for $2 billion](https://techcrunch.com/2025/12/29/meta-just-bought-manus-an-ai-startup-everyone-has-been-talking-about/). In just 8 months, Manus went from launch to $100M+ revenue. Their secret? **Context engineering**.

> "Markdown is my 'working memory' on disk. Since I process information iteratively and my active context has limits, Markdown files serve as scratch pads for notes, checkpoints for progress, building blocks for final deliverables."
> — Manus AI

## The Problem

Claude Code (and most AI agents) suffer from:

- **Volatile memory** — TodoWrite tool disappears on context reset
- **Goal drift** — After 50+ tool calls, original goals get forgotten
- **Hidden errors** — Failures aren't tracked, so the same mistakes repeat
- **Context stuffing** — Everything crammed into context instead of stored

## The Solution: 3-File Pattern

For every complex task, create THREE files:

```
task_plan.md      → Track phases and progress
findings.md       → Store research and findings
progress.md       → Session log and test results
```

### The Core Principle

```
Context Window = RAM (volatile, limited)
Filesystem = Disk (persistent, unlimited)

→ Anything important gets written to disk.
```

## The Manus Principles

| Principle | Implementation |
|-----------|----------------|
| Filesystem as memory | Store in files, not context |
| Attention manipulation | Re-read plan before decisions (hooks) |
| Error persistence | Log failures in plan file |
| Goal tracking | Checkboxes show progress |
| Completion verification | Stop hook checks all phases |

## Usage

Once installed, the AI agent will:

1. **Ask for your task** if no description is provided
2. **Create `task_plan.md`, `findings.md`, and `progress.md`** in your project directory
3. **Re-read plan** before major decisions (via PreToolUse hook)
4. **Remind you** to update status after file writes (via PostToolUse hook)
5. **Store findings** in `findings.md` instead of stuffing context
6. **Log errors** for future reference
7. **Verify completion** before stopping (via Stop hook)

Invoke with:
- `/planning-with-files:plan` - Type `/plan` to find in autocomplete (v2.11.0+)
- `/planning-with-files:start` - Type `/planning` to find in autocomplete
- `/planning-with-files` - Only if you copied skills to `~/.claude/skills/`

See [docs/quickstart.md](docs/quickstart.md) for the full 5-step guide.

## Key Rules

1. **Create Plan First** — Never start without `task_plan.md`
2. **The 2-Action Rule** — Save findings after every 2 view/browser operations
3. **Log ALL Errors** — They help avoid repetition
4. **Never Repeat Failures** — Track attempts, mutate approach

## When to Use

**Use this pattern for:**
- Multi-step tasks (3+ steps)
- Research tasks
- Building/creating projects
- Tasks spanning many tool calls

**Skip for:**
- Simple questions
- Single-file edits
- Quick lookups

## File Structure

```
planning-with-files/
├── commands/                # Plugin commands
│   ├── plan.md              # /planning-with-files:plan command (v2.11.0+)
│   └── start.md             # /planning-with-files:start command
├── templates/               # Root-level templates (for CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT)
├── scripts/                 # Root-level scripts (for CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT)
├── docs/                    # Documentation
│   ├── installation.md
│   ├── quickstart.md
│   ├── workflow.md
│   ├── troubleshooting.md
│   ├── gemini.md            # Gemini CLI setup
│   ├── cursor.md
│   ├── windows.md
│   ├── kilocode.md
│   ├── codex.md
│   ├── opencode.md
│   ├── mastra.md             # Mastra Code setup
│   └── boxlite.md            # BoxLite sandbox setup
├── examples/                # Integration examples
│   └── boxlite/             # BoxLite quickstart
│       ├── README.md
│       └── quickstart.py
├── planning-with-files/     # Plugin skill folder
│   ├── SKILL.md
│   ├── templates/
│   └── scripts/
├── skills/                  # Legacy skill folder
│   └── planning-with-files/
│       ├── SKILL.md
│       ├── examples.md
│       ├── reference.md
│       ├── templates/
│       └── scripts/
│           ├── init-session.sh
│           ├── check-complete.sh
│           ├── init-session.ps1   # Windows PowerShell
│           └── check-complete.ps1 # Windows PowerShell
├── .gemini/                 # Gemini CLI skills
│   └── skills/
│       └── planning-with-files/
├── .codex/                  # Codex IDE skills
│   └── skills/
├── .opencode/               # OpenCode IDE skills
│   └── skills/
├── .claude-plugin/          # Plugin manifest
├── .cursor/                 # Cursor skills + hooks
│   ├── hooks.json           # Hook configuration
│   ├── hooks/               # Hook scripts (bash + PowerShell)
│   └── skills/
├── .kilocode/               # Kilo Code skills
│   └── skills/
├── .openclaw/               # OpenClaw skills
│   └── skills/
├── .adal/                   # AdaL CLI / Sylph AI skills
│   └── skills/
├── .pi/                     # Pi Agent skills
│   └── skills/
│       └── planning-with-files/
├── .github/                 # GitHub Copilot hooks
│   └── hooks/
│       ├── planning-with-files.json  # Hook configuration
│       └── scripts/         # Hook scripts (bash + PowerShell)
├── .mastracode/             # Mastra Code skills + hooks
│   └── skills/
├── CHANGELOG.md
├── LICENSE
└── README.md
```

## Documentation

| Document | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| [Installation Guide](docs/installation.md) | All installation methods (plugin, manual, Cursor, Windows) |
| [Quick Start](docs/quickstart.md) | 5-step guide to using the pattern |
| [Workflow Diagram](docs/workflow.md) | Visual diagram of how files and hooks interact |
| [Troubleshooting](docs/troubleshooting.md) | Common issues and solutions |
| [Gemini CLI Setup](docs/gemini.md) | Google Gemini CLI integration guide |
| [OpenClaw Setup](docs/openclaw.md) | OpenClaw integration guide |
| [Kiro Setup](docs/kiro.md) | Kiro steering files integration |
| [Cursor Setup](docs/cursor.md) | Cursor IDE-specific instructions |
| [Continue Setup](docs/continue.md) | Continue integration guide (skills + slash prompt) |
| [Windows Setup](docs/windows.md) | Windows-specific notes |
| [Kilo Code Support](docs/kilocode.md) | Kilo Code integration guide |
| [Codex Setup](docs/codex.md) | Codex IDE installation and usage |
| [OpenCode Setup](docs/opencode.md) | OpenCode IDE installation, oh-my-opencode config |
| [FactoryAI Droid Setup](docs/factory.md) | FactoryAI Droid integration guide |
| [Antigravity Setup](docs/antigravity.md) | Antigravity IDE integration guide |
| [CodeBuddy Setup](docs/codebuddy.md) | CodeBuddy IDE integration guide |
| [AdaL CLI Setup](docs/adal.md) | AdaL CLI / Sylph AI integration guide |
| [Pi Agent Setup](docs/pi-agent.md) | Pi Agent integration guide |
| [Copilot Setup](docs/copilot.md) | GitHub Copilot hooks integration guide |
| [Mastra Setup](docs/mastra.md) | Mastra Code integration guide |
| [BoxLite Setup](docs/boxlite.md) | BoxLite micro-VM sandbox integration guide |


## Acknowledgments

- **Manus AI** — For pioneering context engineering patterns
- **Anthropic** — For Claude Code, Agent Skills, and the Plugin system
- **Lance Martin** — For the detailed Manus architecture analysis
- Based on [Context Engineering for AI Agents](https://manus.im/blog/Context-Engineering-for-AI-Agents-Lessons-from-Building-Manus)

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please:
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Submit a pull request

## License

MIT License — feel free to use, modify, and distribute.

---

**Author:** [Ahmad Othman Ammar Adi](https://github.com/OthmanAdi)

## Star History

<a href="https://repostars.dev/?repos=OthmanAdi%2Fplanning-with-files&theme=copper"><img src="https://repostars.dev/api/embed?repo=OthmanAdi%2Fplanning-with-files&theme=copper" width="100%" alt="Star History Chart" /></a>

Commit message:

docs: replace documentation table in README with link to docs/ folder

README.md, after:

# Planning with Files

> **Work like Manus** — the AI agent company Meta acquired for **$2 billion**.

[![Closed Issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-closed/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files?color=success)](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed)
[![Closed PRs](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-pr-closed/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files?color=success)](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aclosed)

<details>
<summary><strong>💬 A Note from the Author</strong></summary>

To everyone who starred, forked, and shared this skill — thank you. This project blew up in less than 24 hours, and the support from the community has been incredible.

If this skill helps you work smarter, that's all I wanted.

</details>

<details open>
<summary><strong>🌍 See What the Community Built</strong></summary>

| Fork | Author | Features |
|------|--------|----------|
| [devis](https://github.com/st01cs/devis) | [@st01cs](https://github.com/st01cs) | Interview-first workflow, `/devis:intv` and `/devis:impl` commands, guaranteed activation |
| [multi-manus-planning](https://github.com/kmichels/multi-manus-planning) | [@kmichels](https://github.com/kmichels) | Multi-project support, SessionStart git sync |
| [plan-cascade](https://github.com/Taoidle/plan-cascade) | [@Taoidle](https://github.com/Taoidle) | Multi-level task orchestration, parallel execution, multi-agent collaboration |
| [agentfund-skill](https://github.com/RioTheGreat-ai/agentfund-skill) | [@RioTheGreat-ai](https://github.com/RioTheGreat-ai) | Crowdfunding for AI agents with milestone-based escrow on Base |

*Built something? [Open an issue](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/issues) to get listed!*

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🤝 Contributors</strong></summary>

See the full list of everyone who made this project better in [CONTRIBUTORS.md](./CONTRIBUTORS.md).

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>📦 Releases & Session Recovery</strong></summary>

### Current Version: v2.18.2

| Version | Highlights |
|---------|------------|
| **v2.18.2** | Mastra Code hooks fix (hooks.json + docs accuracy) |
| **v2.18.1** | Copilot garbled characters complete fix |
| **v2.18.0** | BoxLite sandbox runtime integration |
| **v2.17.0** | Mastra Code support + all IDE SKILL.md spec fixes |
| **v2.16.1** | Copilot garbled characters fix — PS1 UTF-8 encoding + bash ensure_ascii (thanks @Hexiaopi!) |
| **v2.16.0** | GitHub Copilot hooks support (thanks @lincolnwan!) |
| **v2.15.1** | Session catchup false-positive fix (thanks @gydx6!) |
| **v2.15.0** | `/plan:status` command, OpenCode compatibility fix |
| **v2.14.0** | Pi Agent support, OpenClaw docs update, Codex path fix |
| **v2.11.0** | `/plan` command for easier autocomplete |
| **v2.10.0** | Kiro steering files support |
| **v2.7.0** | Gemini CLI support |
| **v2.2.0** | Session recovery, Windows PowerShell, OS-aware hooks |

[View all releases](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/releases) · [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md)

> 🧪 **Experimental:** Isolated parallel planning (`.planning/{uuid}/` folders) is being tested on [`experimental/isolated-planning`](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/tree/experimental/isolated-planning). Try it and share feedback!

---

### Session Recovery

When your context fills up and you run `/clear`, this skill **automatically recovers** your previous session.

**How it works:**
1. Checks for previous session data in `~/.claude/projects/`
2. Finds when planning files were last updated
3. Extracts conversation that happened after (potentially lost context)
4. Shows a catchup report so you can sync

**Pro tip:** Disable auto-compact to maximize context before clearing:
```json
{ "autoCompact": false }
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🛠️ Supported IDEs (16 Platforms)</strong></summary>

| IDE | Status | Installation Guide | Format |
|-----|--------|-------------------|--------|
| Claude Code | ✅ Full Support | [Installation](docs/installation.md) | Plugin + SKILL.md |
| Gemini CLI | ✅ Full Support | [Gemini Setup](docs/gemini.md) | Agent Skills |
| OpenClaw | ✅ Full Support | [OpenClaw Setup](docs/openclaw.md) | Workspace/Local Skills |
| Kiro | ✅ Full Support | [Kiro Setup](docs/kiro.md) | Steering Files |
| Cursor | ✅ Full Support | [Cursor Setup](docs/cursor.md) | Skills + Hooks |
| Continue | ✅ Full Support | [Continue Setup](docs/continue.md) | Skills + Prompt files |
| Kilocode | ✅ Full Support | [Kilocode Setup](docs/kilocode.md) | Skills |
| OpenCode | ✅ Full Support | [OpenCode Setup](docs/opencode.md) | Personal/Project Skill |
| Codex | ✅ Full Support | [Codex Setup](docs/codex.md) | Personal Skill |
| FactoryAI Droid | ✅ Full Support | [Factory Setup](docs/factory.md) | Workspace/Personal Skill |
| Antigravity | ✅ Full Support | [Antigravity Setup](docs/antigravity.md) | Workspace/Personal Skill |
| CodeBuddy | ✅ Full Support | [CodeBuddy Setup](docs/codebuddy.md) | Workspace/Personal Skill |
| AdaL CLI (Sylph AI) | ✅ Full Support | [AdaL Setup](docs/adal.md) | Personal/Project Skills |
| Pi Agent | ✅ Full Support | [Pi Agent Setup](docs/pi-agent.md) | Agent Skills |
| GitHub Copilot | ✅ Full Support | [Copilot Setup](docs/copilot.md) | Hooks |
| Mastra Code | ✅ Full Support | [Mastra Setup](docs/mastra.md) | Skills + Hooks |

> **Note:** If your IDE uses the legacy Rules system instead of Skills, see the [`legacy-rules-support`](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/tree/legacy-rules-support) branch.

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>🧱 Sandbox Runtimes (1 Platform)</strong></summary>

| Runtime | Status | Guide | Notes |
|---------|--------|-------|-------|
| BoxLite | ✅ Documented | [BoxLite Setup](docs/boxlite.md) | Run Claude Code + planning-with-files inside hardware-isolated micro-VMs |

> **Note:** BoxLite is a sandbox runtime, not an IDE. Skills load via [ClaudeBox](https://github.com/boxlite-ai/claudebox) — BoxLite’s official Claude Code integration layer.

</details>

---

A Claude Code plugin that transforms your workflow to use persistent markdown files for planning, progress tracking, and knowledge storage — the exact pattern that made Manus worth billions.

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Claude Code Plugin](https://img.shields.io/badge/Claude%20Code-Plugin-blue)](https://code.claude.com/docs/en/plugins)
[![Claude Code Skill](https://img.shields.io/badge/Claude%20Code-Skill-green)](https://code.claude.com/docs/en/skills)
[![Cursor Skills](https://img.shields.io/badge/Cursor-Skills-purple)](https://docs.cursor.com/context/skills)
[![Kilocode Skills](https://img.shields.io/badge/Kilocode-Skills-orange)](https://kilo.ai/docs/agent-behavior/skills)
[![Gemini CLI](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gemini%20CLI-Skills-4285F4)](https://geminicli.com/docs/cli/skills/)
[![OpenClaw](https://img.shields.io/badge/OpenClaw-Skills-FF6B6B)](https://openclaw.ai)
[![Kiro](https://img.shields.io/badge/Kiro-Steering-00D4AA)](https://kiro.dev/docs/cli/steering/)
[![AdaL CLI](https://img.shields.io/badge/AdaL%20CLI-Skills-9B59B6)](https://docs.sylph.ai/features/plugins-and-skills)
[![Pi Agent](https://img.shields.io/badge/Pi%20Agent-Skills-FF4081)](https://pi.dev)
[![GitHub Copilot](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub%20Copilot-Hooks-000000)](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/reference/hooks-configuration)
[![Mastra Code](https://img.shields.io/badge/Mastra%20Code-Skills-00BCD4)](https://code.mastra.ai)
[![BoxLite](https://img.shields.io/badge/BoxLite-Sandbox-6C3483)](https://boxlite.ai)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/badge/version-2.18.2-brightgreen)](https://github.com/OthmanAdi/planning-with-files/releases)
[![SkillCheck Validated](https://img.shields.io/badge/SkillCheck-Validated-4c1)](https://getskillcheck.com)

## Quick Install

In Claude Code, run:

```
/plugin marketplace add OthmanAdi/planning-with-files
/plugin install planning-with-files@planning-with-files
```

That's it! Now use one of these commands in Claude Code:

| Command | Autocomplete | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| `/planning-with-files:plan` | Type `/plan` | Start planning session (v2.11.0+) |
| `/planning-with-files:status` | Type `/plan:status` | Show planning progress at a glance (v2.15.0+) |
| `/planning-with-files:start` | Type `/planning` | Original start command |

**Alternative:** If you want `/planning-with-files` (without prefix), copy skills to your local folder:

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
cp -r ~/.claude/plugins/cache/planning-with-files/planning-with-files/*/skills/planning-with-files ~/.claude/skills/
```

**Windows (PowerShell):**
```powershell
Copy-Item -Recurse -Path "$env:USERPROFILE\.claude\plugins\cache\planning-with-files\planning-with-files\*\skills\planning-with-files" -Destination "$env:USERPROFILE\.claude\skills\"
```

See [docs/installation.md](docs/installation.md) for all installation methods.

## Why This Skill?

On December 29, 2025, [Meta acquired Manus for $2 billion](https://techcrunch.com/2025/12/29/meta-just-bought-manus-an-ai-startup-everyone-has-been-talking-about/). In just 8 months, Manus went from launch to $100M+ revenue. Their secret? **Context engineering**.

> "Markdown is my 'working memory' on disk. Since I process information iteratively and my active context has limits, Markdown files serve as scratch pads for notes, checkpoints for progress, building blocks for final deliverables."
> — Manus AI

## The Problem

Claude Code (and most AI agents) suffer from:

- **Volatile memory** — TodoWrite tool disappears on context reset
- **Goal drift** — After 50+ tool calls, original goals get forgotten
- **Hidden errors** — Failures aren't tracked, so the same mistakes repeat
- **Context stuffing** — Everything crammed into context instead of stored

## The Solution: 3-File Pattern

For every complex task, create THREE files:

```
task_plan.md      → Track phases and progress
findings.md       → Store research and findings
progress.md       → Session log and test results
```

### The Core Principle

```
Context Window = RAM (volatile, limited)
Filesystem = Disk (persistent, unlimited)

→ Anything important gets written to disk.
```

## The Manus Principles

| Principle | Implementation |
|-----------|----------------|
| Filesystem as memory | Store in files, not context |
| Attention manipulation | Re-read plan before decisions (hooks) |
| Error persistence | Log failures in plan file |
| Goal tracking | Checkboxes show progress |
| Completion verification | Stop hook checks all phases |

## Usage

Once installed, the AI agent will:

1. **Ask for your task** if no description is provided
2. **Create `task_plan.md`, `findings.md`, and `progress.md`** in your project directory
3. **Re-read plan** before major decisions (via PreToolUse hook)
4. **Remind you** to update status after file writes (via PostToolUse hook)
5. **Store findings** in `findings.md` instead of stuffing context
6. **Log errors** for future reference
7. **Verify completion** before stopping (via Stop hook)

Invoke with:
- `/planning-with-files:plan` - Type `/plan` to find in autocomplete (v2.11.0+)
- `/planning-with-files:start` - Type `/planning` to find in autocomplete
- `/planning-with-files` - Only if you copied skills to `~/.claude/skills/`

See [docs/quickstart.md](docs/quickstart.md) for the full 5-step guide.

## Key Rules

1. **Create Plan First** — Never start without `task_plan.md`
2. **The 2-Action Rule** — Save findings after every 2 view/browser operations
3. **Log ALL Errors** — They help avoid repetition
4. **Never Repeat Failures** — Track attempts, mutate approach

## When to Use

**Use this pattern for:**
- Multi-step tasks (3+ steps)
- Research tasks
- Building/creating projects
- Tasks spanning many tool calls

**Skip for:**
- Simple questions
- Single-file edits
- Quick lookups

## File Structure

```
planning-with-files/
├── commands/                # Plugin commands
│   ├── plan.md              # /planning-with-files:plan command (v2.11.0+)
│   └── start.md             # /planning-with-files:start command
├── templates/               # Root-level templates (for CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT)
├── scripts/                 # Root-level scripts (for CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT)
├── docs/                    # Documentation
│   ├── installation.md
│   ├── quickstart.md
│   ├── workflow.md
│   ├── troubleshooting.md
│   ├── gemini.md            # Gemini CLI setup
│   ├── cursor.md
│   ├── windows.md
│   ├── kilocode.md
│   ├── codex.md
│   ├── opencode.md
│   ├── mastra.md             # Mastra Code setup
│   └── boxlite.md            # BoxLite sandbox setup
├── examples/                # Integration examples
│   └── boxlite/             # BoxLite quickstart
│       ├── README.md
│       └── quickstart.py
├── planning-with-files/     # Plugin skill folder
│   ├── SKILL.md
│   ├── templates/
│   └── scripts/
├── skills/                  # Legacy skill folder
│   └── planning-with-files/
│       ├── SKILL.md
│       ├── examples.md
│       ├── reference.md
│       ├── templates/
│       └── scripts/
│           ├── init-session.sh
│           ├── check-complete.sh
│           ├── init-session.ps1   # Windows PowerShell
│           └── check-complete.ps1 # Windows PowerShell
├── .gemini/                 # Gemini CLI skills
│   └── skills/
│       └── planning-with-files/
├── .codex/                  # Codex IDE skills
│   └── skills/
├── .opencode/               # OpenCode IDE skills
│   └── skills/
├── .claude-plugin/          # Plugin manifest
├── .cursor/                 # Cursor skills + hooks
│   ├── hooks.json           # Hook configuration
│   ├── hooks/               # Hook scripts (bash + PowerShell)
│   └── skills/
├── .kilocode/               # Kilo Code skills
│   └── skills/
├── .openclaw/               # OpenClaw skills
│   └── skills/
├── .adal/                   # AdaL CLI / Sylph AI skills
│   └── skills/
├── .pi/                     # Pi Agent skills
│   └── skills/
│       └── planning-with-files/
├── .github/                 # GitHub Copilot hooks
│   └── hooks/
│       ├── planning-with-files.json  # Hook configuration
│       └── scripts/         # Hook scripts (bash + PowerShell)
├── .mastracode/             # Mastra Code skills + hooks
│   └── skills/
├── CHANGELOG.md
├── LICENSE
└── README.md
```

## Documentation

All platform setup guides and documentation are in the [docs/](./docs/) folder.


## Acknowledgments

- **Manus AI** — For pioneering context engineering patterns
- **Anthropic** — For Claude Code, Agent Skills, and the Plugin system
- **Lance Martin** — For the detailed Manus architecture analysis
- Based on [Context Engineering for AI Agents](https://manus.im/blog/Context-Engineering-for-AI-Agents-Lessons-from-Building-Manus)

## Contributing

Contributions welcome! Please:
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Submit a pull request

## License

MIT License — feel free to use, modify, and distribute.

---

**Author:** [Ahmad Othman Ammar Adi](https://github.com/OthmanAdi)

## Star History

<a href="https://repostars.dev/?repos=OthmanAdi%2Fplanning-with-files&theme=copper"><img src="https://repostars.dev/api/embed?repo=OthmanAdi%2Fplanning-with-files&theme=copper" width="100%" alt="Star History Chart" /></a>
